Add blog post about norovirus resources (#1287)
nextstrain/nextstrain.org: static-site/content/blog/2026-01-23-norovirus.md

## Norovirus groups, types, and variants

Norovirus samples have a dual-typing system based on a polymerase region (RdRp) and capsid region (VP1) of the genome, between which is a known recombination site. The resolution of norovirus typing has undergone multiple changes ([Zheng et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2005.11.015); [Eden et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.03464-12); [Chhabra et al., 2019](https://doi.org/10.1099/jgv.0.001318); [Tatusov et al., 2020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104718)), but generally are split into a "genogroup", "genotype", and "variant" classification for VP1, and "P-group", "P-type", and "variant" for RdRp. For the sake of naming Nextstrain trees, we will name these VP1 group, type, or variants and RdRp group, type or variants respectively.

![Figure 2](/blog/img/norovirus-group-type-variant.png)
**Figure 2. Typing of norovirus samples is based on the VP1 and RdRp region** and are further split out into group, type, and variant resolution.

> Group, type, and variant levels of resolution were roughly classified by a preliminary Nextclade datasets based on either VP1 or RdRp gene. The Norovirus nextclade datasets are preliminary and further development is pending. These datasets have been built from scaffold strains listed at the [Human Calicivirus Typing Tool](https://calicivirustypingtool.cdc.gov/becerance.cgi) as of September 16, 2025.

Reviewer: From [my previous comment](https://github.com/nextstrain/nextstrain.org/pull/1287#discussion_r2625062430):

> In the blog post itself, would be good to add a brief description of why this Nextclade dataset is still a preliminary draft.

Feel free to reword

```suggestion
The public Nextstrain metadata includes group, type, and variant levels of resolution that were roughly classified by a **preliminary** Nextclade datasets based on either VP1 or RdRp gene and **should be used with caution**. The Norovirus Nextclade datasets have not been published yet, pending further fine tuning to [reduce false positives of GII.4](https://github.com/nextstrain/norovirus/issues/27). These datasets have been built from scaffold strains listed at the [Human Calicivirus Typing Tool](https://calicivirustypingtool.cdc.gov/becerance.cgi) as of September 16, 2025.
```
